docs/swtools/airr_swtools_checklist.rst, before:

.. _ToolsChecklist:

AIRR Software WG - Compliance Checklist for AIRR Software Tools
---------------------------------------------------------------

Version 1.0 (when finalised)

This questionnaire should be read in conjunction with the :ref:`ToolsStandard`.

To submit your tool for ratification against the standard, please send the completed questionnaire
to software@airrc.antibodysociety.org.

Please provide comments in italics in each response box where these
would be helpful to facilitate understanding. We kindly ask for a brief
explanatory comment if your answer to a question is `no` or `not applicable`.

Name of Tool:

Contact Name/Institution:

Contact email:

+-----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| **Requirement   | **Question**                                                                                                          | **Response**                                |
| Ref.**          |                                                                                                                       |                                             |
+=================+=======================================================================================================================+=============================================+
| 1               | Where is the source code published (please provide a link)?                                                           |                                             |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 2               | Does the tool support :ref:`DataRepresentations` standards?                                                           | yes/no                                      |
|                 |                                                                                                                       |                                             |
|                 | Please list any other standard data formats that are supported                                                        |                                             |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 3               | Does the distribution include example data?                                                                           | yes/no                                      |
|                 |                                                                                                                       |                                             |
|                 | Is the example data in MiAIRR format, where applicable?                                                               | yes/no/not applicable                       |
|                 |                                                                                                                       |                                             |
|                 | Does the tool support or provide checks for expected output from example data?                                        | yes/no                                      |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 4               | Does the output of the tool include a summary of the run parameters?                                                  | yes/no                                      |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 5               | Is a container build file provided?                                                                                   | yes/no                                      |
|                 |                                                                                                                       |                                             |
|                 | Container technology used?                                                                                            | Docker/Singularity/Other (please specify)   |
|                 |                                                                                                                       |                                             |
|                 | Is the container automatically built as new versions are released?                                                    | yes/no                                      |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 6               | Where can users see what level of support is available? (Please provide a link)                                       |                                             |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 7               | Under what software licence is the tool published? (please provide the name of the licence (e.g. GPL, MIT) or a link  |                                             |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+

Commit message:

Clarify automated checks. Include checks in build process.

docs/swtools/airr_swtools_checklist.rst, after:

.. _ToolsChecklist:

AIRR Software WG - Compliance Checklist for AIRR Software Tools
---------------------------------------------------------------

Version 1.0 (when finalised)

This questionnaire should be read in conjunction with the :ref:`ToolsStandard`.

To submit your tool for ratification against the standard, please send the completed questionnaire
to software@airrc.antibodysociety.org.

Please provide comments in italics in each response box where these
would be helpful to facilitate understanding. We kindly ask for a brief
explanatory comment if your answer to a question is `no` or `not applicable`.

Name of Tool:

Contact Name/Institution:

Contact email:

+-----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| **Requirement   | **Question**                                                                                                          | **Response**                                |
| Ref.**          |                                                                                                                       |                                             |
+=================+=======================================================================================================================+=============================================+
| 1               | Where is the source code published (please provide a link)?                                                           |                                             |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 2               | Does the tool support :ref:`DataRepresentations` standards?                                                           | yes/no                                      |
|                 |                                                                                                                       |                                             |
|                 | Please list any other standard data formats that are supported                                                        |                                             |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 3               | Does the distribution include example data?                                                                           | yes/no                                      |
|                 |                                                                                                                       |                                             |
|                 | Is the example data in MiAIRR format, where applicable?                                                               | yes/no/not applicable                       |
|                 |                                                                                                                       |                                             |
|                 | Does the tool provide automated checks for expected output from example data?                                         | yes/no                                      |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 4               | Does the output of the tool include a summary of the run parameters?                                                  | yes/no                                      |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 5               | Is a container build file provided?                                                                                   | yes/no                                      |
|                 |                                                                                                                       |                                             |
|                 | Container technology used?                                                                                            | Docker/Singularity/Other (please specify)   |
|                 |                                                                                                                       |                                             |
|                 | Is the container automatically built as new versions are released?                                                    | yes/no                                      |
|                 |                                                                                                                       |                                             |
|                 | Does the automated build run the tool against the example data and test the output?                                   | yes/no                                      |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 6               | Where can users see what level of support is available? (Please provide a link)                                       |                                             |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 7               | Under what software licence is the tool published? (please provide the name of the licence (e.g. GPL, MIT) or a link  |                                             |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
