docs/packages/airr-R/overview.rst, before:

.. _ROverview:

AIRR R Reference Library
================================================================================

An R library providing AIRR schema definitions and read, write, and validation
functions for AIRR standard formatted data files.

**Download & Installation**

To install the latest release from CRAN::

    install.packages("airr")

To build from the `source code <https://github.com/airr-community/airr-standards>`_,
first install the build dependencies::

    install.packages(c("devtools", "roxygen2"))

To install the latest development code via devtools::

    library(devtools)
    install_github("airr-community/airr-standards/lang/R@master")

Note, using ``install_github`` will not build the documentation. To generate the
documentation, clone the repository and build as normal. Then run the following
R commands from the package root ``lang/R``::

    library(devtools)
    install_deps(dependencies=T)
    document()
    install()
    test()

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 3
    :hidden:

    About <about>
    Usage Vignette <vignettes/Usage-Vignette>
    Reference Manual <topics>
    Release Notes <news>

Commit message:

V1.3 prep (#405)
* R package release prep
* python package release prep
* Reference API doc organization fixes and rebuild of R package docs.

docs/packages/airr-R/overview.rst, after:

.. _ROverview:

AIRR Data Representation Reference Library
=================================================================================

``airr`` is an R package for working with data formatted according to
the AIRR Data Representation schemas. It includes the full set of schema
definitions along with simple functions for read, write and validation.

Contents
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    Usage Vignette <vignettes/Usage-Vignette>
    Reference Manual <topics>
    Release Notes <news>

Download & Installation
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To install the latest release from CRAN::

    install.packages("airr")

To build from the `source code <https://github.com/airr-community/airr-standards>`_,
first install the build dependencies::

    install.packages(c("devtools", "roxygen2"))

To install the latest development code via devtools::

    library(devtools)
    install_github("airr-community/airr-standards/lang/R@master")

Note, using ``install_github`` will not build the documentation. To generate the
documentation, clone the repository, and then build as normal using the following
R commands from the package root ``lang/R``::

    library(devtools)
    install_deps(dependencies=T)
    document()
    install()

.. include:: about.rst
